                                 ** Advanced Program **

Fifth International Workshop on Accelerating Data Management Systems Using
           Modern Processor and Storage Architectures (ADMS'14)

               to be held in conjunction with VLDB 2014, Hangzhou, China
                                     September 1, 2014 

                                http://www.adms-conf.org/
                      
***************************** Morning  Keynote *****************************

Title: Accelerating Data Management and Processing on Modern Clusters
with RDMA-Enabled Interconnects

Speaker: Prof. Dhabaleswar K. (DK) Panda, The Ohio State University

Bio: Dhabaleswar K. (DK) Panda is a Professor of Computer Science and
Engineering at the Ohio State University. He has published over 300
papers in major journals and international conferences. Dr. Panda and
his research group members have been doing extensive research on
modern networking technologies including InfiniBand, High-Speed
Ethernet and RDMA over Converged Enhanced Ethernet (RoCE). The
MVAPICH2 (High Performance MPI over InfiniBand, iWARP and RoCE) and
MVAPICH2-X software libraries, developed by his research group
(http://mvapich.cse.ohio-state.edu ), are currently being used by more
than 2,150 organizations worldwide (in 72 countries). This software
has enabled several InfiniBand clusters to get into the latest TOP500
ranking during the last decade. More than 210,000 downloads of this
software have taken place from the project's website alone. This
software package is also available with the software stacks of many
network and server vendors, and Linux distributors. The new
RDMA-enabled Apache Hadoop package, consisting of acceleration for
HDFS, MapReduce and RPC, is publicly available from
http://hadoop-rdma.cse.ohio-state.edu . Dr. Panda's research has been
supported by funding from US National Science Foundation, US
Department of Energy, and several industry including Intel, Cisco,
Cray, SUN, Mellanox, QLogic, NVIDIA and NetApp. He is an IEEE Fellow
and a member of ACM. More details about Prof. Panda are available at
http://www.cse.ohio-state.edu/~panda

Abstract: Managing and processing large volumes of data is a significant
challenge being faced by the Big Data community. This has substantial
impact on designing and utilizing modern data management and
processing systems in multiple tiers, from the front-end data
accessing and serving to the back-end data analytics. This scenario
has led to many emerging Big Data middleware systems to emerge, such
as Memcached, HBase, Hadoop, and Spark. The design and deployment of
modern clusters during the last decade has largely been fueled by the
following three factors: 1) advances in multi-core/many-core
technologies and accelerators, 2) Remote Direct Memory Access
(RDMA)-enabled networking (InfiniBand and RoCE), and 3) Solid State
Drives (SSDs). However, current Big Data middleware and the
associated applications are not able to fully take advantage of these
advanced features on modern clusters. This talk will examine
opportunities and challenges in accelerating performance of Big Data
middleware (including Memcached, HBase, Hadoop, and Spark) in
different data management and processing tiers with the latest
technologies available on modern clusters. An overview of the
High-Performance Big Data project (http://hibd.cse.ohio-state.edu )
will be presented. High-performance designs using RDMA to accelerate
Memcached, HBase, Hadoop, and Spark frameworks on InfiniBand and RoCE
clusters will be demonstrated. The presentation will also include
initial results on optimizing performance of Memcached with SSD
support. An overview of a set of benchmarks (OSU HiBD Benchmarks,
OHB) to evaluate performance of different components in an isolated
manner will be presented.

 *********************** Session 1: Compute Optimizations **************************

 * "Multipredicate Join Algorithms for Accelerating Relational Graph Processing on GPUs", 
  Haicheng Wu (Georgia Institute of Technology), Daniel Zinn, Molham Aref, (LogicBox Inc.) 
  and Sudhakar Yalamanchili (Georgia Institute of Technology).

 * "Data Parallel Quadtree Indexing and Spatial Query Processing of Complex Polygon Data on GPUs",
  Jianting Zhang, Simin You, (City University of New York) and Le Gruenwald (The University
  of Oklahoma)

 * "HASHI: An Application Specific Instruction Set Extension for Hashing",
  Oliver Arnold, Sebastian Haas, Gerhard Fettweis and Benjamin Schlegel, Thomas Kissinger, Tomas Karnagel,
  and Wolfgang Lehner (Technische Universitat Dresden)  

 * "QTM: Modelling Query Execution with Tasks",Steffen Zeuch and Johann-Christoph Freytag
  (Humboldt Universitat zu Berlin)  
					

 *********************** Session 2: Memory/Storage Optimizations ***********************

 * "Flash-Conscious Cache Population for Enterprise Database Workloads,
  Hyojun Kim (IBM Research, Almaden), Ioannis Koltsidas,
  Nikolas Ioannou (IBM Research, Zurich), Sangeetha Seshadri, Paul Muech, Clement
  Dickey, and Lawrence Chiu  (IBM Research, Almaden) 

 * "A Prolegomenon on OLTP Database Systems for Non-Volatile Memory",
  Justin Debrabant (Brown University), Joy Arulraj, Andrew Pavlo, (Carnegie Mellon University), 
  Michael Stonebraker (MIT CSAIL), Stan Zdonik (Brown University) and
  Subramanya Dulloor (Intel Labs)  

 * "An Approach for Hybrid-Memory Scaling Columnar In-Memory Databases,
  Bernhard Hoeppner (SAP AG), Ahmadshah Waizy (Fujitsu Technology Solutions GmbH) 
  Aand Hannes Rauhe (SAP AG)  

 * "ERIS: A NUMA-Aware In-Memory Storage Engine for Analytical Workload",
  Thomas Kissinger, Tim Kiefer, Benjamin Schlegel, Dirk Habich, Daniel Molka, 
  and Wolfgang Lehner (Technische Universitat Dresden)   


 **************************************  Afternoon Keynote *****************************

Title: Oracle's In-Memory Data Management Strategy: In-Memory in all
Tiers, and for all Workloads

Speaker: Tirthankar Lahiri, Oracle

Bio: Tirthankar Lahiri is the Vice President of Development at Oracle, and is
 responsible for the Data Technologies area for the Oracle Database
 (this area coves Data, Space, and Transaction management) as well as
 the Oracle TimesTen In-Memory Database. Tirthankar has 18 years of
 experience in the Database industry. He has worked extensively in a
 variety of Database Systems areas, for which he holds multiple
 patents: Manageability, Performance, Scalability, High Availability,
 Caching, Distributed Concurrency Control, In-Memory Data Management,
 etc. Tirthankar has a B.Tech in Computer Science from IIT, Kharagpur,
 and an MS in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University. He was
 in the PhD program at Stanford and his research areas included
 Multiprocessor Operating Systems and Semi-Structured Data.  
 

Abstract: We describe Oracle's pragmatic two-pronged approach for
delivering In-Memory Technology to both OLTP as well as Analytics
usecases. On the one hand, Oracle TimesTen is a specialized,
memory-resident relational database, designed for ultra-low response
time. TimesTen typically runs within the application-tier as an
embeddable database and is deployed by thousands of customers
requiring low-latency database access. On the other-hand, the new
Oracle 12c Database In-Memory option delivers general-purpose
in-memory capabilities for the vast range of enterprise applications
and massive database sizes supported by Oracle Database. Since the
In-Memory option is built seamlessly into the Oracle Database engine,
it is fully compatible with all of the functionality and high
availability mechanisms of the Oracle Database, and can be used by
applications without any changes whatsoever. The In-Memory option
provides a unique dual-format row/column in-memory representation thus
avoiding the tradeoffs inherent in single-format in-memory
databases. Unlike traditional in-memory databases, the new In-Memory
option does not limit the size of the database to the size of
available DRAM:   numerous optimizations spanning DRAM, Flash, Disk,
as well as machines in a RAC cluster, allow databases of virtually
unlimited size. We describe the new In-Memory option in the context of
the full spectrum of Oracle's numerous storage optimizations, showing
that in-memory data management is an important and natural
evolutionary enhancement to the existing deep technology stack of the
Oracle Database. 



